---
title: Python and Excel
author: Abhijit Dasgupta
date: '2009-07-24'
tags:
  - Python
slug: '32'
---

Excel is unfortunately the lingua franca of data delivery (at least in small amounts) from my collaborators. Often I have to merge several disparate bits of information from several Excel files together.  I used to do this using R, since that's what I've known for many years.

Now, of course, I've discovered Python!!! I fortunately discovered the excellent **xlrd** and **xlwt** packages by John Machin, and the subsequent addition of the **xlutils** package. You can find links for these at the newly created [python-excel.com](http://www.python-excel.com).  I found it was quite easy to read data from Excel files using **xlrd**, and then create Python dicts using the common ID as the keys. Merging was then merely appending, or rather extending, the appropriate lists based on the common ID using a loop or list comprehension. The new list of lists could then be easily written out to a new Excel file using **xlwt**. I suppose I could also convert the list of lists to a _Numpy_ array and then directly save it into _R, _but that would actually require advanced thinking, now, wouldn't it.

My other joyful experience today using Python was in a similar vein, but using the powerful and excellent **re** module. I've found that the **re** module is easier and appears more powerful than _R_''s **grep** tools, though both are based on regular expressions. I had a grid which had scores for a biomarker, which mimiced the actual grid the pathologist was reading from. Of course this is not the kind of data structure _R_ likes, per se, so I tried to get the IDs and scores out using Python. It turned out that 10 lines of code utilizing powerful grouping tools in regular expressions enabled me to parse this grid-like data quickly into a dict with IDs as keys and scores as data. This was then easily merged to other clinical data on the patients to create a spreadsheet. I then used **xlwt** to write this out to a fresh Excel file for archiving as well as for R to read. The development of this code took maybe 3o minutes!!! Again I'm impressed by Python's power.

Now if only I can find an easy and reliable way to convert LaTeX tables and figures into OpenOffice or Word while preserving the integrity of the document.
